# DevNote 00000

I present my Developer notes on Ku programming language.

Here I will try to document development process, design decisions, insights and
thoughts on various aspects of programming a compiler and friend tools for a new
language.

First of all what type of language Ku will be? I design it as system programming
language. Edsger Dijkstra referred to system languages as machine oriented high
order languages.

Upfront list of my key design choices:

* Imperative, procedural
* Explicit control flow (no exceptions or similar mechanisms)
* Manual memory managment (no hidden memory allocations)
* Pointers and raw memory access
* Careful polymorphism (if any)
* Interoperability with C (at least ability to use existing C code and libraries)

Creating a new programming language sounds like difficult and challenging task
(and it is!), so why bother? In the past I tried quite a few system languages and
all of them left me dissatisfied.

In sections below I will discuss system languages that already exist. It is not
meant as a language bash rant, each of them is well established, renowned and
already used to produce good quality software. The discussion is a baseground
for my language design. Good things we should keep and bad things that should be
avoided.

## C

Programmers who use C agree on one thing, the language has many flaws. Most will
name safety and lack of features. Although I argee with them, these are not my main
grudges against it. My (incomplete) list of most annoying C things include:

### Tooling

Do not get me wrong. C has many tools around it. The "around" word describes the
situation perfectly in that regard. These tools are fragmented, developed not as
part of the language, but to fill the void that comes from developer experience
with it.

### Dependecy managment

The language does not have it. Comes from third-party tools. Every each one of them
comes with its own complications. Most painpoints come from distribution of binary
artifacts and shared libraries. Leaves very similar taste as tooling.

### Build system

In the same state as dependecy managment.

### Standard library

C standard library is badly designed by today's standards. Those who disagree with
the statement are delusional beyond saving. Most things from standard library should
be avoided like the plague.

### Syntax and semantics

C has its share of quirks when it comes to syntax and language semantics. Most of
them are the matter of taste and habit. Though few are notorious:

* macros
* weak typing system
* C strings
* non-trivial function and const type definitions are horrendous to read
* arrays (array pointers, array decay)
* one global namespace for all code in the universe

### Documentation

Sparse. Limited. Difficult to access. Difficult to navigate.

### Features

What I lack the most in C among its features:

* namespacing mechanism of any kind
* methods (not OOP, just methods)
* multiple return values (for error handling mostly)

### Impression

From my perspective C is a cumbersome tool. The language could be used to deliver
software, but is painful every time you touch it.
